---
layout: post
title: How does the South Pole Telescope enure that they see the CMB ?
author: prakrut
date: 2021-10-12 10:34:30 +1100
categories: [Physics, CMB]
tags: [SPT, CMB, maps]
math : true
mermaid: true
---
The South Pole Telescope (SPT) aims to observe the oldest light in the Universe, the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB).
However, the observations of the sky from SPT are contaminated by various kinds of noise such as the atmospheric noise,
detector noise, etc. Noise can be interpreted as a signal in the later stages of the analysis and therefore it is
necessary to ensure 
the maps are required to pass some null tests. These null tests hinge upon the
assumption that the signal in the sky is constant but the noise varies with time. Hence, differencing two similar
observations should remove the signal and the resultant map should contain only noise which should be consistent with
null signal. 

We have used two vaguely defined concepts, namely, '_similar observations_' and '_consistency with null signal_'
which we will define more formally in the rest of the post.

The SPT-3G instrument made 562 subfield observations. From these observations, we construct partial-depth full-field
maps, which are called _bundles_. These bundles are constructed by chronologically coadding observations within each
subfield untill the combined unpolzarized weight approaches $1/(N_{bundles})$ of the unpolzarized weight in the full
season coadd. Typically around 100 bundles are constructed and each bundle has 3-5 observations.
For SPT-3G, we perform the following types of null tests:
1. **Sun**;
2. **Moon**;
3. **Azimuth**;
4. **Left-right**;
5. **Chronological.**

While this list of null tests is not exhaustive and other null tests such as wafer and saturation null tests have been
done in the past[^ref1], we do not do those here. Let us explore each of these tests.

# Types of null tests
## Sun 
The Sun tests can be done in two ways, namely, with or without rebundling. The case without rebundling is teh simplest
as it only requires sorting the already constructed bundles. The bundles are sorted according to either the mean or
median of the Sun declination value of the observations that go into the making each bundle.

When rebundling of observations is allowed, then this can be done in further two ways. The bundles can be made based on
observation times or declination of the Sun. For bundling based on observation time, the observations are sorted
according to **blah** while for declination based rebundling, the observations are bundled according to **blah**.
```mermaid
flowchart TD;
    A(Gather information)-->B{Allow Rebundling?};
    B-->|No|C(sort bundles by the median of each bundle's Sun declination);
    B-->|Yes|D{Rebundling by which index?}
    D-->E(Obs ID / Timestamp)
    D-->F(Dec of the Sun)
    E-->G{Split point}
    F-->G
    G-->|Horizon|I(Split observations according to whether Sun was above or below the horizon)
    G-->|None|H(Split weights evenly between bundles)
```
## Moon
The Moon null tests are exactly identical to the Sun null tests described above, except that these depend upon the
position of the Moon instead of the Sun.

## Azimuth

## Left-Right

## Chronological

# Passing Criteria


### References:
[^ref1]: [Dutcher. et al](https://journals.aps.org/prd/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevD.104.022003)

