---
layout: post
title: Covariance Matrix estimation
author: prakrut
date: 2023-03-28 10:22:00 +1100
categories: [statistics]
tags: [SPT]
math : true
---
I found myself wondering about a better way to estimate the covariance matrix for CMB.
The code for this is available on Github: [Github repo](https://cosmosinquiry.com)
# The Problem
The South Pole Telescope observes the sky multiple times and adds up these maps into partial depth coadds. Each such coadd has around 2-5 individual sky observations. We then create the cross correlate these maps with other partial depth coadds to find the cross spectra. These cross spectra bounce around the mean cross spectra and give the error in estimation of the bandpowers encoded in the form of a covariance matrix. This covariance matrix is supposed to be estimated from the data cross spectra and simulated spectra from the mock observed maps. This is where the problem lies. It is known that the estimators for estimating the covmat are biased. Moreover, the estimated covariance matrix often turns out to be noisy and condition it though a very arbitrary method. 

# Proposed Solutions
We can solve this problem in a Bayesian manenr by asking what is the probability of observing a covmat given the data?
Denoting the covmat by $\Sigma$ and the set of cross spectra (our data) as $\mathcal{D}$, we have the Bayes theorem giving us,

$$ \mathcal{P}(\Sigma | \mathcal{D}) = \frac{\mathcal{P}(\mathcal{D} | \Sigma ) \ \mathcal{P}(\Sigma)}{ P(\mathcal{D}) } $$

## Solution 1
Model the data as a multivariate Normal distribution with a known mean but unknown covariance. The distribution of the sample covmat for a sample from a multivariate Normal distribution is known to follow the Wishart distribution. So the problem reduces to estimating the parameters of Wishart distribution. A Wishart distribution is defined by the degrees of freedom and a scale matrix which is the covmat of the multivariate normal distribution from which our samples are drawn. This can be done as follows,
1. model a covmat from theory with some basic parameters;
2. define a Wishart distribution with $\nu=$ model dof and the model covmat as the scale matrix S;
2. define the multivariate likelihood as usual - 

    $$
    \mathcal{L} (\mathcal{D} | \mu, \Sigma_W) = (2 \pi)^{-nD/2} |\Sigma_W|^{-N/2} e^{ -\frac{1}{2} \sum_{n=1}^{N}\left(x_n - \mu \right)^T\Sigma_W^{-1} \left(x_n - \mu \right)  } \ ;
    $$

3. sample the likelihood space to infer the parameters of the model covmat.

Modelling the theory covmat in step 1 is the key step here. One could include adding 1/f noise, beams, and some atmospheric noise modelling for the diagonal components. The functional form of the diagonal can be inferred from the simulation cross spectra.


We can also let the mean be an unknown in this model, however, given that we have bin width of 50 and $\mathcal{\ell}_{max}=13000$, we have 260 bins. Sampling from a 260 dimensional space is a sampler's nightmare. So we reconsider our purist ambitions and settle for a more tractable problem. We can model the mean as $n^{th}$ degree polynomial and get away with 3-5 modelling parameters. This along with off-diagonal components. 

### Covmat model
#### Diagonal
We model the covmat in two parts: the diagonal and the off-diagonal. 
The diagonal modelling has 3 components - the beam, $1/f$ noise, and Poisson noise. The beam component is modeled with an amplitude parameter, $A_{beam}$ as,

$$
T_{beam} = \frac{\mathcal{\ell}(\mathcal{\ell}+1)}{2\pi} \frac{1}{\sqrt{\mathcal{\ell}}} \frac{ A_{beam} }{ B_{\mathcal{\ell}}^{f_1} B_{\mathcal{\ell}}^{f_2}}
$$

We model the $1/f$ noise component with 3 parameters as

$$
T_{finv} = A_{f_inv}(\frac{\ell_{pivot}}{\mathcal{\ell}})^n
$$

Finally, the Poisson noise is taken as a constant over the entire range

$$
T_{poisson} = A_{poisson} \mathcal{\ell}
$$

Thus the diagonal components can be modeled with 5 parameters - $A_{beam}$, $A_{finv}$, $\mathcal{\ell_{pivot}}$, $n$, and $A_{poisson}$.

#### Off-Diagonal
We know that the first bin from the diagonal is negatively correlated with the diagonal due to our pipeline and there are wild oscillation at high-$\mathcal{\ell}$.




## Solution 2
Break the covmat modelling into two parts -  the scale vector and the correlation matrix. The scale vector can be modeled in terms of the signal and noise spectra from various on-diagonal and off-diagonal blocks. 

For the correlation matrix, there can be two ways to model:
1. The probability density function of a correlation matrix is known to have a LKJ distribution so the problem reduces to estimating the parameters of LKJ distribution from the data correlation matrices. The first bin of the correlation matrix is usually negatively correlated because we are working with a finite sky and we take out the mode coupling matrix in the MASTER pipeline. The LKJ distribution may probably fail at accounting for this.
2. We know that the correlation matrix arises from the mode coupling matrix which has a Toeplitz structure. If we define the Toeplitz structure to be some $n^{th}$-degree polynomial then we can infer the coefficients of this polynomial from the data. Though, the Toeplitz structure sees wild oscillation at higher $\mathcal{\ell}$ so polynomial might not be a good way to model this. 

Finally, we can add a Poisson component to the whole model.

<!-- ## Solution 3 ? () -->
<!-- I do not know if it even sensible to propose such a solution. However, I will allow myself to do stupid things. -->
<!-- We can train Normalizing Flows on our set of cross spectra such that we learn the forward mapping for a multivariate normal distribution from the --> 
